---
title: "[Database System Concepts / Ch3] Introduction to SQL"
categories: [CS, DB]
tags: [db]
math: true
---

## 3.1  Overview of the SQL Query Language
The original version of SQL, called Sequel, was developed by IBM in the early 1970s. It has evolved since then and changed its name to SQL (Structured Query Language).

The SQL language has several important parts

1. <span class="hl">Data-definition language (DDL)</span>
   * The SQL DDL provides commands for **defining relation schemas**, **deleting relations**, **modifying relation schemas**.
2. <span class="hl">Data-manipulation language (DML)</span>
   * The SQL DML provides the ability to **query** information from DB, **insert** tules into, **delete** tuples from, and **modify** tuples in the database.
3. **Integrity**
   * The SQL DDL includes commands for specifying  **integrity constraints** that the data in the database must satisfy.
   * Updates that violate integrity constraints are disallowed.
4. **View definition**
   * The SQL DDL includes commands for **defining views**.
5. **Transaction control**
   * Commands for specifying the beginning and end-points of **transactions**.
6. **Embedded SQL and Dynamic SQL**
   * How SQL statements can be embedded within general-purpose programming languages
7. **Authorization**
   * The SQL DDL includes commands for specifying **access rights** to relations and views


## 3.2 SQL Data Definition

The set of relations in a database are specified using a  <span class="hl">data-definition language (DDL)</span>.

The SQL DDL not only allows specification of a set of relations, but also **information about each relation**, including

1. **Schema** for each relation
2. **Types** of values associated with each attribute
3. **Integrity constraints**
4. **Set of indices** to be maintained for each relation
5. **Security and authorization information** for each relation
6. **Physical storage structure** of each relation on disk

### Basic Types

THe SQL standard supports built-in types, including

1. `char(n)`
   * A **fixed-length** character string with length `n`. 
2. `varchar(n)`: A **variable-length** character string with user-specified **maximum length** `n`.
3. `int`
   * An integer
4. `smallint`
   * A small integer (machine-dependent subset of int)
5. `numeric(p, d)`
   * A fixed-point number with `p` digits (plus a sign).
   * `d` of `p` digits are to the **right** of the decimal points.
   * Ex) `numeric(3,1)` allows `44.5` but does not allow `444.5` or `0.32`
6. `real, double precision`
   * Floating-point and double-precision floating-point numbers
7. `float(n)`
   * A floating-point number with precision of at least `n` digits

> Each type may include a special value called `null` value indicating an absent value.
{: .prompt-info}

> When storing a `char` value with the less length than the specified length `n` then the spaces are appended to match the length.
> 
When comparing two chars, the shorter one is appended with spaces to match the length.
>
When char and varchar are compared, extra spaces may be added to the varchar type to match the length. However, it may vary depending on the database system.
>
Hence, **Always use** `varchar` instead of `char` type to avoid these problems.
{: .prompt-info}

### Basic Schema Definition

* Define an **SQL relation** by `CREATE TABLE` command.
    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE department (
        dept_name VARCHAR(20),
        building VARCHAR(15),
        budget NUMERIC(12, 2),
        PRIMARY KEY (dept_name)
    );
    ```
* The general form of the `CREATE TABLE` is
    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE r (
        A1 D1,
        A2 D2,
        ...,
        An Dn,
        <integrity-constraint 1>
        ...,
        <integrity-constraint k>
    );
    ```
    * `r`: **Name of the relation**
    * Each `Ai` is the **name of an attribute** in the schema of relation `r`
    * `Di` is the **domain of attribute Ai** (type of attribute) with optional constraints that restrict the domain of Ai.

- Some of <span class="hl">integrity constraints</span> commands
  * **PRIMARY KEY** $(A_{J_1}, A_{j_2},...,A_{j_m})$
    * Attributes$(A_{J_1}, A_{j_2},...,A_{j_m})$ form the primary key for the relation.
    * The primary-key attributes MUST be **NON-NULL** and **UNIQUE**.
  * **FOREIGN KEY** $(A_{J_1}, A_{j_2},...,A_{j_m})$ **REFERENCES** $s$
    * Attributes $(A_{J_1}, A_{j_2},...,A_{j_m})$ for any tuple in the relation must correspond to values of the **primary key attributes** of some tuple in the relation $s$.
  
    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE COURSE (
        course_id VARCHAR(7),
        title VARCHAR(50),
        dept_name VARCHAR(20),
        PRIMARY KEY (course_id),
        FOREIGN KEY (dept_name) REFERENCES department(dept_name)
    );

    CREATE TABLE department (
        dept_name VARCHAR(20),
        building VARCHAR(15),
        PRIMARY KEY (dept_name)
    );
    ```
    * `FOREIGN KEY (dept_name) REFERENCES department(dept_name)` specifies that for each **course** tuple, `dept_name` must exist in the **primary key attribute** `dept_name` of **department** relation.
    * Some database systems allow foreign-key constrain definition without specifying referenced attributes explicitly: `FOREIGN KEY (dept_name) REFERENCES department`
  * **NOT NULL**
    * NULL value is NOT allowed for the specified attributes.

> A newly created relation is initially **empty**.
{: .prompt-info}

#### Data Manipulation Statements
* **Remove a relation** from an SQL database
  * `DROP TABLE r;`
    * Deletes not only all tuples of `r` but also the **schema** for `r`.
  * `DELETE FROM r;`
    * Just deletes all **tuples** in `r`.
* **Alter an existing relation**
  * `ALTER TABLE r ADD A D;`
    * `r`: Name of existing relation
    * `A`: Name of the attribute to be added
    * `D`: Type of the added attribute
    ```sql
    ALTER TABLE course ADD course_tag VARCHAR(255);
    ```
  * `ALTER TABLE r DROP A;`
    * Many database systems **do not support** dropping of attributes
    * `A`: Name of an attribute to be dropped.

## 3.3 Basic Structure of SQL Queries

The basic structure of an SQL query consists of three clauses

1. `select`
2. `from`
3. `where`

### 3.3.1 Queries on a Single Relation

<span class="hl">SELECT</span>
* `SELECT dept_name FROM instructor;`
  * `SELECT DISTINCT dept_name FROM instructor;` - remove duplicates
  * `SELECT dept_name FROM instructor;` - allow duplicates
  * The **select** may contain arithmetic expressions `+, -, *, /`
    * `SELECT ID, name, dept_name, salary * 1.1 FROM instructor;`

<span class="hl">WHERE</span> 
* `SELECT name FROM instructor WHERE dept_name = 'Comp. Sci';`

### 3.3.2 Queries on Multiple Relations

We often query against multiple relations.

```sql
SELECT A1, A2, ..., An
FROM r1, r2, ..., rm
where P;
```

* `SELECT`: list the attributes desired in the result of a query
* `FROM`: list of the relations to be accessed
  * It defines a **Cartesian product** of the relations
  * The result relation has **all attributes from all the relationis** in the FROM clause. So the resulted relation might be **extremely big**. So we usually restrict with WHERE clause.
  * If the same attribute name appears in both `r1` and `r2`, we prefix the name of the relation. (ex, `instructor.ID`, `instructor.dept_name`, etc)
  * For those attributes that appear only one of the schemas, we can drop the relation-name prefix
* `WHERE`: Predicate involving attributes of the relation in the FROM clause.

In general, the meaning of an SQL query can be understood as

1. Generate a Cartesian product of the relations listed in the `FROM` clause.
2. Apply the predicates specified in the `WHERE` clause
3. For each tuple in Step (2), output the attributes specified in the `SELECT` clause.

This explains "what" the result of an SQL query, not "how" it should be executed.
* A real implementation optimizes evaluation by generating only elements that satisfy the WHERE clause (as far as possible)

## 3.4 Additional Basic Operations
### <span class="hl">Rename</span> operation: `AS`
* Renaming attributes
```sql
SELECT name as instructor_name, course_id
FROM instructor, teaches
WHERE instructor.ID = teaches.ID;
```
* Renaming relations
```sql
SELECT T.name, S.course_id
FROM instructor as T, teaches as S
WHERE T.ID = S.ID;
```
* An identifier such as `T` and `S` is referred to as a <span class="hl">correlation name</span> or <span class="hl">table alias</span>, <span class="hl">correlation variable</span>, or <span class="hl">tuple variable</span>

### <span class="hl">String</span> operations
* `LIKE` for pattern matching
 * `%`: matches any substring
 * `_`: matches any character
 * Pattern matching is **case-sensitive**
```sql
SELECT dept_name
FROM department
WHERE building LIKE '%Watson%';
```
* Offers `NOT LIKE` for mismatches
* `\` for escape character
 * `LIKE 'ab\%cd%'` matches all strings beginning with "ab%cd"

### Attribute Specification in the SELECT Clause

The asterisk `*` can be used in SELECT to denote **all attributes**.

```sql
SELECT instructor.*
FROM instructor, teaches
WHERE instructor.ID = teaches.ID;
```

`SELECT * FROM ...` indicates **all attributes of the result relation** are selected

### Ordering the Display of Tuples

SQL offers `ORDER BY` clause to sort the result of a query.

```sql
SELECT name
FROM instructor
WHERE dept_name = 'Physics'
ORDER BY name;
```

* By default, `ORDER BY` sorts in **ascending order**
* To specify the order, use `DESC` or `ASC`

### WHERE-clause Predicates

* `between`: comparison operator for range
  ```sql
  SELECT name
  FROM instructor
  WHERE salary between 90000 and 100000;
  ```
  * Similarly for `NOT BETWEEN`


## Set Operations

SQL supports the following set operations.

* `UNION`
* `INTERSECT`
* `EXCEPT`

Suppose we have two sets of courses.

```sql
SELECT course_id
FROM section
WHERE semester = 'Fall' and year = 2017;
```

```sql
SELECT course_id
FROM section
WHERE semester = 'Spring' and year = 2018;
```

* `Union`
  * Automatically **eliminates duplicates**. (use `UNION ALL` to retain duplicates)
  ```sql
  (SELECT course_id
  FROM section
  WHERE semester = 'Fall' and year = 2017;)
  UNION
  (SELECT course_id
  FROM section
  WHERE semester = 'Spring' and year = 2018);
  ```
* `INTERSECT`
  * Automatically **eliminates duplicates**. (use `INTERSECTION ALL` to retain duplicates)
  ```sql
  (SELECT course_id
  FROM section
  WHERE semester = 'Fall' and year = 2017;)
  INTERSECT
  (SELECT course_id
  FROM section
  WHERE semester = 'Spring' and year = 2018);
  ```
* `EXCEPT`
  * Automatically **eliminates duplicates**. (use `EXCEPT ALL` to retain duplicates)
  * To find all courses taught in Fall 2017 but NOT in Spring 2018 semester.
  ```sql
  (SELECT course_id
  FROM section
  WHERE semester = 'Fall' and year = 2017;)
  INTERSECT
  (SELECT course_id
  FROM section
  WHERE semester = 'Spring' and year = 2018);
  ```