---
title: "OOP: Class"
categories: [Dev, Python]
tags: deployment
math: true
---

## `Class`

- Class ia a `blueprint` for creating an `instance`. Creating a new class creates a new `type` of object with which new `instances` of that type are made.
- Class can hold `attributes` describing states and `methods` describing behaviors.
- In Python class, all attributes are `public` by default (except `private variables` which we'll see later)
- Class are themselves objects too!
- When a class definition is created, a `new namespace` is created which acts as a `local` scope. Also, the `class object` is created which is a wrapper around the class namespace.

## `Class Object`

The `class object` has two operations.

1. `Attribute references` $( including\ functions )$ by `.name`
2. `Instantiation` $(creating\ an\ instance)$

```python
class Person:
    planet = "earth"

    def greeting(self):
        print("hello world")
```

Let's print the class object. You can see that `Person` is a class object which is located in the `global` namespace with the name `Person`.

```python
print(Person)
print(globals()['Person']) # `Person` class obj is in the global namespace!
print(Person == globals()['Person'])
print(Person.__name__)
```

    <class '__main__.Person'>
    <class '__main__.Person'>
    True
    Person

Let's now print the attributes of Person class object.

```python
print(Person.planet) # string object
print(Person.greeting) # function object
```

    earth
    <function Person.greeting at 0x7f9cc796b310>

As you can see, you can directly access attributes through `.name`.

Bonus: When you read source codes, you probably have seen doc strings$(documentation\ strings)$. The doc strings are usually located at the top of the class namespace with **'''docstring'''**. What's up with this? In fact, the strings declared at the top of the class namespace is assigned to `__doc__` attribute of the class. Let's check this out.

```python
class Person:
    "This is the doc string"
    planet = "earth"

    def greeting(self):
        print("hello world")
```

```python
Person.__doc__
```

    'This is the doc string'

You can see the whole list of class attributes using `__dict__` keyword which contains all the `writable` attributes of the object. Since class is also an object, it surely has one!

```python
Person.__dict__
```

    mappingproxy({'__module__': '__main__',
                  '__doc__': 'This is the doc string',
                  'planet': 'earth',
                  'greeting': <function __main__.Person.greeting(self)>,
                  '__dict__': <attribute '__dict__' of 'Person' objects>,
                  '__weakref__': <attribute '__weakref__' of 'Person' objects>})

You can actually see all those `__doc__`, `planet`, and `greeting` attributes up there.  
By the way, we'll talk about `class (private) attributes and methods` in the later posts.

Cool! We've gone deeper into what `class object` is and how we can access the class attributes.
Now, let's dive into **how to instantiate from the class object**

## `Instantiation`

Class `instantiation` is performed just like you call any other `function` by `Person()`. But wouldn't it be great if we can assign some **initial states**? This is why we write a special methods `__init__`. Notice that there's NO problem even if you don't write `__init__` and create an instance! See below,

```python
p1 = Person()
print(p1)
```

    <__main__.Person object at 0x7f9cc6d66a00>

But although this is acceptable, what the heck would you want that? Let's try to see how `__init__` works.

```python
class Person:
    def __init__(self):
        print("Instantiation successful!")

p1 = Person()
print(p1)
```

    Instantiation successful!
    <__main__.Person object at 0x7f9cc6d663d0>

Great! You just created an `instance` of the Person class and assign to a variable `p1`. But wait.. what is that `self`? Why do we even need that every time we write `__init__`?

When a class defines an `__init__` method, class instantiation **automatically invokes** `__init__()` for the class instance$(which\ is\ p1\ in\ this\ case)$ just created! That's why we want to take advantage of this automation. Of course, just like any other functions with other parameters.

Back to our question: why `self` as a default parameter? When you instantiate using `Person()`, `self` is actually passed as an argument to the special `__init__` method. Therefore, `__init__` **MUST** have `self` parameter. The `self` itself refers to the **initialized instance** which will be again equal to what is stored in `p1` in the example above. Let' see what it means in code.

```python
class Person:
    def __init__():
        print("Instantiation successful!")

p1 = Person()
print(p1)
```

    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    Input In [82], in <module>
          2     def __init__():
          3         print("Instantiation successful!")
    ----> 5 p1 = Person()
          6 print(p1)


    TypeError: __init__() takes 0 positional arguments but 1 was given

Look at the exception message! We never put any argument in `Person()` which initialized an instance but it says **but 1 was given**!. To wrap up, even if you didn't write any argument in `Person(...)`, the initialized instance is automatically passed to the `__init__` method so we definitely have to have a paremter that handles that argument. This is why we need `__init__(self)`.

```python
class Person:
    def __init__(self):
        print("Instantiation successful!")

p1 = Person()
```

    Instantiation successful!

We've seen how `__init__` method and `self` actually work behind the scene. With this magical functionality, we can do some cool stuff like setting initial states. Remember you can always have any number of parameters for `__init__` method **as long as** you can `self`. In this way, you can manipulate initial states for instances. Remember! `self` in `__init__` method refers to the newly created instance so if you want to set initial states for that particular instance, you must use `self.xxx = xxx`

```python
class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
        print(f"You just created an instance {self}\nwhich holds attributes name: {self.name}, age:{self.age}")
        return None


p1 = Person("Jason", 45)
```

    You just created an instance <__main__.Person object at 0x7f9cc6d7fc70>
    which holds attributes name: Jason, age:45

I mentioned above that the `self` indeed is exactly the same as the newly created instance which is stored in the variable name called `p1`. Since python stores reference of the object into the variable name, `p1` should be equal to `self`. Let's see if this is true.

```python
print(p1)
```

    <__main__.Person object at 0x7f9cc6d7fc70>

Notice that the memory location of `p1` is exactly the same as that of `self`! Now we have a full understanding of what's really happening when creating an instance. Great job.

Side note: By default, `__init__` method must return `None`. If you ever try to return anything else, it will raise an TypeError.

```python
class Person:
    def __init__(self):
        return "Hello World"

p1 = Person()
```

    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    Input In [86], in <module>
          2     def __init__(self):
          3         return "Hello World"
    ----> 5 p1 = Person()


    TypeError: __init__() should return None, not 'str'

It's worthless, but you can actually write `return None` just to see if it works

```python
class Person:
    def __init__(self):
        return None

p1 = Person()
```

Cool! I believe you've gained sufficient knowledge to deal with class object and instantiation. Now, let's go deep into what we can do with `Instance Objects`

## `Instance Objects`

So far, we've talked about what `class object` is and how we can create an `instance object` from the class which is the ultimate blueprint for instances. Now, what are the cool things we can do we `instance objects`?

The only operations allowed for instance objects are **attribute references**. There are two types of attribute references.

1. `data attributes` $(instance\ variables)$
2. `method attributes` $(function\ that\ "belongs"\ to\ an\ object)$

-> In python, method does not specifically belong to class. But for simplicity, method will refer to functions of **instance objects**

Remember: Everything is an object. The instances variables are objects and so are method objects

```python
class Person:
    planet = "Earth"
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age

    def introduce(self):
        print(f"My name is {self.name} and {self.age} years old")

p1 = Person("Jason", 88)
p2 = Person("Amanda", 102)
```

Notice that `Person` class has `planet` and `f` attributes. When we create an instance `p1` from Person class, the attributes of the class come into existence for that `p1` instance object. Therefore, we can access the attributes of `Person` class by `p1.xxx`.

Here, it's worth mentioning that the class attribute `planet = "Earth"` is not assigned using `self`. This means that this variable does not belong to any specific `instance object` but belongs to the class. Even though we can access this variable from instance objects, it will always be `"Earth"`.

```python
p1.introduce()
p2.introduce()
```

    My name is Jason and 88 years old
    My name is Amanda and 102 years old

As you can see above, we can now access `method objects` for each `instance object`. Since we assigned instance varialbes differently for p1 and p2 upon instantiation, the name and age are different.

```python
print(p1.planet)
print(p2.planet)
print(p1.planet is p2.planet)
print(id(p1.planet) == id(p2.planet))
```

    Earth
    Earth
    True
    True

As mentioned above, both will have the same `planet` value.

INFO: Person.introduce is not same as p1.introduce or p2.introduce. `Person.introduce` is an **function object** while `p1.introduce` and `p2.introduce` are **method objects**

```python
print(type(Person.introduce))
print(type(p1.introduce))
print(type(p2.introduce))
```

    <class 'function'>
    <class 'method'>
    <class 'method'>

Now, let's talk about something very important. You may have noticed there's `self` in the class function attribute `def introduce(self)`. It made sense for `__init__` but why for this?

The answer is when you call `method object` from `p1` by `p1.introduce()`, what's really happening behind the hood is `Person.introduce(p1)`. They are exactly equivalent. Let's see with an example.

```python
p1.introduce()
```

    My name is Jason and 88 years old

```python
Person.introduce(p1)
```

    My name is Jason and 88 years old

Boom! since it's tiresome to write `Person.introduce(p1)` everytime we call methods, the developer of python made it possible to call it with `p1.introduce()`. This is why you need `self` in class function attributes as well since we're literally passing `p1` in `Person.introduce(p1)`.

When you have other parameters than `self`, it works exactly the same.

```python
class Person:

    def __init__(self):
        pass

    def introduce(self, name, mood):
        print(f"My name is {name} and I'm {mood} today.")

p1 = Person()
p1.introduce("Jason","happy")
Person.introduce(p1, "Jason", "happy")
```

    My name is Jason and I'm happy today.
    My name is Jason and I'm happy today.

When you have multiple parameters, the `instance object` is inserted before the passed arguments. So in this case, `p1, "Jason", "happy"`

## `Class and Instance variables`

---

Putting everyting general,

- `Instance variables` are **unique** to each instance
- `Class variables` are **shared** among all instances

```python
class Person:
    class_var = "This is class variable"

    def __init__(self, inst_var):
        self.inst_var = inst_var

p1 = Person('Person 1')
p2 = Person('Person 2')

print(Person.class_var)
print(p1.class_var)
print(p2.class_var)
```

    This is class variable
    This is class variable
    This is class variable

In other words, you cannot access `inst_var` from `Person` class.

```python
print(Person.inst_var)
```

    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    AttributeError                            Traceback (most recent call last)

    Input In [129], in <module>
    ----> 1 print(Person.inst_var)


    AttributeError: type object 'Person' has no attribute 'inst_var'

### What if there're both class variable and instance variable with same name?

```python
class Person:
    var1 = "hello"
    def __init__(self, var1):
        self.var1 = var1

p1 = Person("bye")
print(Person.var1)
print(p1.var1)
```

    hello
    bye

Obviously, `Person.var1` will print the original "hello" but `p1.var1` prints modified "bye" value. If both an instance and class have same variable name, the attribute lookup prioritizes the `instance variable`.

### Some remarks

A `function object` that is a **class attribute** defines a method for instances of that class. However, it's not necessary to always textually include the function object inside the indented block of the class. You can just simply assign a normal function declared outside the class scope and assign it.

```python
def f(self):
    print("hello")

class Person:
    g = f

p = Person()
p.g()
```

    hello

Although `f()` is declared outside the class scope, you referenced it and made g as a `class attribute`, there's absolutely no difference!

### One last note

Everything is an `object` in python! Therefore, it has a `class` (also called its **type**) which is stored in `object.__class__`.

The built-in function `type(obj)` generally returns the same object as `obj.__class__`.

```python
def div():
    print("-"*50)
a = 1
b = "jason"
c = lambda x: x + 1

print(object.__class__)
div()

print(a.__class__)
print(type(a))
div()

print(b.__class__)
print(type(b))
div()

print(c.__class__)
print(type(c))
```

    <class 'type'>
    --------------------------------------------------
    <class 'int'>
    <class 'int'>
    --------------------------------------------------
    <class 'str'>
    <class 'str'>
    --------------------------------------------------
    <class 'function'>
    <class 'function'>

## `Private Variables`

---

Straight to the point, python **DOES NOTE** support true private variables. However, there're conventions and `name mangling` you might find useful.

1. Sometimes we do not want to show our internal details of the class. One typical convention is that a name **prefixed with \_**, `_name` should be treated as an private part of API.

2. Any identifier of the form \_\_name $(at\ least\ two\ leading\ underscores\ and\ at\ most\ one\ trailing\ underscore)$ is **textually** replaced by `_classname__name` with leading underscore(s) stripped.

```python
class Person:
    __var1_ = "hello" # at least 2 leading _ and at most 1 training _
    __var2 = "bye" # at least 2 leading _ and at most 1 training _
    ___var3 = "what's up" # at least 2 leading _ and at most 1 training _
    _nonprivate1 = "public1" # only one leading _ : not private (no name-mangling)
    __nonprivate2__ = "public2" # two training _ : not private (no name-mangling)

p = Person()
print(Person._Person__var1_)
print(Person._Person__var2)
print(Person._Person___var3)
print(Person._nonprivate1) # at least two leading underscores required but found ONLY ONE.""
print(Person.__nonprivate2__) # at most one trailing underscore required but found TWO
```

    hello
    bye
    what's up
    public1
    public2

```python
Person.__dict__
```

    mappingproxy({'__module__': '__main__',
                  '_Person__var1_': 'hello',
                  '_Person__var2': 'bye',
                  '_Person___var3': "what's up",
                  '_nonprivate1': 'public1',
                  '__nonprivate2__': 'public2',
                  '__dict__': <attribute '__dict__' of 'Person' objects>,
                  '__weakref__': <attribute '__weakref__' of 'Person' objects>,
                  '__doc__': None})

It might be a bit hard to understand at first, but those 5 examples will be enough for you to understand the subtleties.

---

Congratulations! We have looked into much details of `class object`, `instance object`, intricacies of `Instantiations` as well as `private variables`. In the next post, we'll jump into **Inheritance**.
